Leios design: Write introduction and overview chapter (#597)
input-output-hk/ouroboros-leios: docs/leios-design/README.md

Despite being hard deadlines, these targets reflect the reality that network vulnerability increases when not being met. The protocol's safety and liveness guarantees depend on honest nodes being able to propagate blocks rapidly enough to prevent adversarial forks from gaining traction. Failure to meet these timing constraints can lead to increased rates of short forks, reduced chain quality, and - if persistent - ultimately compromise the integrity of the ledger. 

## Concurrency and resource management

The current primary responsibilities of a Cardano node are roughly:

- Block diffusion: receiving chains from upstream, validate and select the best chain, and transmit chains downstream.
- Transaction submission: receiving, validating, and transmitting transactions to be included in blocks.
- Block production: creating new blocks and extending current chain when selected as slot leader. 

> Despite this apparent simplicity, this already results in a highly concurrent system once cardinalities of upstream and downstream network peers are considered. A node typically maintains in the order of 10 upstream and 100 downstream connections, each of which may be simultaneously requesting or serving data. All of these operations share critical resources including memory, CPU, and network bandwidth, requiring careful resource management to ensure that timing requirements are met even under load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite this apparent simplicity, this already results in a highly concurrent system once cardinalities of upstream and downstream network peers are considered. A `cardano-node` with the default configuration maintains 20 upstream hot peers, 10 upstream warm peers and can have up to a few hundred downstream connections, each of which may be simultaneously requesting or serving data. All of these operations share critical resources, including memory, CPU, and network bandwidth, requiring careful resource management to ensure timing requirements are met even under load.
```

Leios significantly expands this concurrency model by introducing new responsibilities:

- Endorser block and closure diffusion: receiving, validating, and transmitting EBs and their transaction closures.

> - Voting and vote diffusion: receiving, validating, and transmitting own and foreign votes on EBs. 

Reviewer: My mistake, it should be:

* 2 pipelined + 3 non-piplined per **upstream peers** => 7 threads per **upstream peer**;
* 1 pipeliend + 4 non-piplined per **downstream peer** => 6 threads per **downstream peer**

and for linear leios:

* 4 pipelined + 3 non-piplined per **upstream peers** => 11 threads per **upstream peer**;
* 1 pipeliend + 6 non-piplined per **downstream peer** => 8 threads per **downstream peer**

The rule is: each pipelined side takes 2 threads, non-pipelined just one.

A discrete event simulation implemented in Rust, models Leios message exchanges between nodes, abstracting lower-level details for speed—running orders of magnitude faster than real time to enable statistical analysis over thousands of runs with complete observability and arbitrary adversarial behavior injection. This validates security arguments by systematically exploring protocol behavior under varying loads, expected data diffusion in small to medium sized network topologies, or adversarial scenarios like data withholding, and exploration of protocol parameters before testnet deployment.

> Another Haskell-based simulation using IOSim and the actual network framework used in the `cardano-node`. This reduces model-implementation divergence while enabling studies of the dynamic behavior and resource management in detail. While IOSim is used in the existing network and consensus layers through property-based testing, and extends naturally to Leios components, the simulator built from this was not able to scale to large networks.

Author: @bwbush @nfrisby Do you recall what made the Haskell sim slow?

Both approaches necessarily abstract real system details and thus provide evidence of correct behavior under idealized conditions and suggest workable parameters, but cannot definitively predict real-world performance. Maintaining simulation synchronization with evolving implementation requires discipline, but enables rapid exploration of alternatives, early feature validation, and serves as executable documentation for new developers.

## Prototyping and adversarial testing

Prototypes on real infrastructure validate performance characteristics that simulation typically cannot guarantee. The line between simulation and prototyping is blurry, but both concepts share the trait of allowing rapid exploration of the most uncertain aspects of the design before committing to a full implementation. Referring back to the key threats and assumptions to validate early, the primary focus of prototyping is on network diffusion performance under high throughput conditions and adversarial scenarios.

> **Network diffusion prototype:** An early implementation of the actual Leios network protocols and potential freshest-first delivery mechanisms, that allows running experiments with various network topologies. Ledger validation of Leios concepts is stubbed out and transmitted data is generated synthetically to focus purely on network performance. Deployed to controlled environments like local devnets and private testnets like the the Performance and Testing cluster, this prototype systematically explores how performance scales with network size and block size, tests different topologies, and crucially answers whether the real network stack achieves the diffusion deadlines required by protocol security arguments. Key measurements include endorser block arrival time distributions, freshest-first multiplexing effectiveness, topology impact on diffusion, and behavior under adversarial scenarios including eclipse attempts and targeted withholding. These measurements will answer questions like, "how much" freshest-first delivery we need, whether the proposed network protocols are practical to implement and what protocol parameter are feasible.

Reviewer: Just suggesting to remove the _potential_ from _potential freshest first delivery_:
```suggestion
**Network diffusion prototype:** An early implementation of the actual Leios network protocols and freshest-first delivery mechanisms, that allows running experiments with various network topologies. Ledger validation of Leios concepts is stubbed out and transmitted data is generated synthetically to focus purely on network performance. Deployed to controlled environments like local devnets and private testnets like the the Performance and Testing cluster, this prototype systematically explores how performance scales with network size and block size, tests different topologies, and crucially answers whether the real network stack achieves the diffusion deadlines required by protocol security arguments. Key measurements include endorser block arrival time distributions, freshest-first multiplexing effectiveness, topology impact on diffusion, and behavior under adversarial scenarios including eclipse attempts and targeted withholding. These measurements will answer questions like, "how much" freshest-first delivery we need, whether the proposed network protocols are practical to implement and what protocol parameter are feasible.
```
